Good morning everyone, welcome to Introduction to Statistics.
Today we'll be covering basic concepts of data analysis.
Let me start by asking, who here has worked with data before?
I've used Excel for some basic calculations.
I've done some data entry in my previous job.
I'm completely new to this, to be honest.
That's perfectly fine! We'll start from the basics.
Let me share my screen to show you some examples.
Here we have a dataset showing student test scores.
The first thing we want to do is understand our data.
What does that mean, understand our data?
Great question! Understanding data means looking at its structure.
How many observations do we have? What variables are present?
Are there any missing values or outliers?
I see some empty cells in the spreadsheet.
Exactly! Those are missing values, and we need to handle them.
Let's talk about different ways to handle missing data.
Can we just delete those rows?
Sometimes, but not always. It depends on the situation.
If we have a lot of data, deleting a few rows might be okay.
But if we have limited data, we might need other strategies.
What other strategies are there?
We can use mean imputation, median imputation, or more advanced methods.
But let's not get ahead of ourselves. First, let's explore our data.
I'll show you how to create some basic visualizations.
Will we be using R or Python for this?
We'll start with Excel to build intuition, then move to R.
R is great for statistical analysis and visualization.
I've never used R before. Is it hard to learn?
It has a learning curve, but we'll take it step by step.
Let me create a histogram of our test scores.
This will show us the distribution of scores.
I can see most scores are in the middle range.
Exactly! That's a normal distribution pattern.
Now let's calculate some summary statistics.
The mean, median, and standard deviation.
What's the difference between mean and median?
Great question! The mean is the average, the median is the middle value.
When data is normally distributed, they're usually close.
But with skewed data, they can be quite different.
Can you show us an example of skewed data?
Absolutely! Let me switch to a different dataset.
This shows household income data, which is typically right-skewed.
Notice how the tail extends to the right?
Yes, I can see that! The mean would be higher than the median.
Exactly right! You're getting it.
Now, let's talk about your first assignment.
You'll be working with a real dataset and creating visualizations.
When is it due?
Next Friday at midnight. I'll post the details on Canvas.
Any questions about what we covered today?
I think I understand the basics now.
Me too. The visualizations really helped.
Excellent! Next week we'll dive deeper into probability.
Have a great week everyone, and don't forget to do the readings!
Class dismissed.